olddocs/About.md, before:

New possible version of About.md (older is down to the end)

# Killer demo notebook (markdown)

Goal: show, in ~10 minutes, why this is not a fancy calculator, but a thinking pad that makes real-life reasoning faster than Excel, phone calc, or Wolfram.

0) Warm-up: “natural” math that stays readable
PI * 2 =>6.2832
sqrt(16) + 2.5 =>6.5
max(3, 7) * 2 =>14

1) Personal finance: budget, scenarios, and “what changed?”

Track a monthly budget, then change one knob and see everything update.

rent = $1250
utilities = $185
internet = $75
subscriptions = $49.99
monthly total = rent + utilities + internet + subscriptions =>$1559.99
yearly total = monthly total * 12 =>$18719.88


What if rent increases 6% next renewal?

next rent = 6% on rent =>$1325
next monthly = next rent + utilities + internet + subscriptions =>$1634.99
delta = next monthly - monthly total =>$75
delta as % of monthly total =>4.8074%

2) Split a bill, but with real human inputs
people = 6
pizza = $18.99
drinks = $9.50
tip = 10%
subtotal = pizza + drinks =>$28.49
total = tip on subtotal =>$31.339
each = total / people =>$5.2232


Round per person, then reconcile rounding remainder

each rounded = round(each, 2) =>$5.22
paid total = each rounded * people =>$31.32
remainder = total - paid total =>$0.019

3) Units + reasoning: make “dimension mistakes” hard to miss
trip distance = 12.5 km
trip time = 25 min
speed = trip distance / trip time =>8.3333 m/s
speed to km/h =>30 km/h


Energy example (derived units + conversion)

mass = 2 kg
accel = 3 m/s^2
force = mass * accel =>6 N
distance = 4 m
energy = force * distance =>24 J
energy to kWh =>6.6667e-6 kWh

4) Lists: real-world “many numbers” reasoning in one line

(This foreshadows the list spec you asked for.)

expenses = $1250, $185, $75, $49.99
sum(expenses) =>$1559.99
distribution = expenses / sum(expenses) as % =>80.1295%, 11.8597%, 4.8080%, 3.2028%


Turn “many speeds” into a min/mean/max summary

speeds = 8.2 m/s, 8.4 m/s, 8.1 m/s, 8.6 m/s
min(speeds) =>8.1 m/s
mean(speeds) =>8.325 m/s
max(speeds) =>8.6 m/s

5) Solver: “I know relationships, not the unknown”

Classic “I know the formula, I want the missing variable.”

solve qty:
  total = $90
  price = $3
  total = price * qty
=>qty = 30


Units-aware solve

solve time:
  distance = 120 km
  speed = 80 km/h
  distance = speed * time
=>time = 1.5 h

6) Time: deadlines and planning without spreadsheets
today =>2026-01-07
deadline = today + 3 weeks =>2026-01-28


Work time

start = 09:15
end = 17:45
worked = end - start =>8.5 h

7) Uncertainty: the “thinking aid” superpower
length = 10 ± 0.2 cm =>[9.8, 10.2] cm
area = length^2 =>[96.04, 104.04] cm^2


A decision example: can it fit?

door = 80 ± 1 cm =>[79, 81] cm
box = 80 ± 0.2 cm =>[79.8, 80.2] cm
clearance = door - box =>[-1.2, 1.2] cm


Interpretation: might fit, might not. That’s honest reasoning.

8) Explanation mode: trust-building
explain energy


Expected output (example):

energy = force × distance
force = mass × accel = 2 kg × 3 m/s^2 = 6 N
distance = 4 m
energy = 6 N × 4 m = 24 J


If you implement plotting later, this notebook becomes even more killer by adding:

histogram of speeds

pie chart of distribution

time-series “budget by month”

uncertainty intervals as bands










============================





# SmartPad Overview

SmartPad is a text‑first computation pad. You type plain lines, define variables, write expressions, and append the trigger `=>` to see inline results as lightweight widgets next to your text. Your text never changes; results are decorations.

## Key capabilities
- Inline results for any line ending in `=>`
- Variables with immediate reuse across lines
- Units and dimensional analysis with conversions
- Clear inline errors next to the exact trigger
- Variable panel displaying current values
- Templates and example snippets
- Number scrubbing and semantic highlighting
- Save and load functionality for content persistence

## Quick examples
```text
2 + 3 => 5

length = 10 m
time = 20 s
speed = length / time => 0.5 m/s
speed to km/h => 1.8 km/h

width = 14 m
area = length * width => 140 m^2
area => 140 m^2

mass = 3 kg
accel = 9.8 m/s^2
force = mass * accel => 29.4 N
force to lbf => 6.61 lbf
```

Notes
- Results may differ slightly due to rounding and smart display thresholds.
- Widgets appear only when the line ends with `=>` (or a combined assignment with `=>`).

## Where to go next
- Learn all user‑facing features and exact behavior → [Spec.md](./Spec.md)
- See how it works under the hood → [Architecture.md](./Architecture.md)

Commit message:

Implement unit and currency annotation for lists in expression evaluation
This commit enhances the expression evaluation framework by introducing support for unit and currency annotations on lists. Users can now apply units to entire numeric lists, with automatic conversion for mixed units and error handling for incompatible units. Additionally, the documentation has been updated to reflect these changes, and new tests have been added to validate the functionality, ensuring a more robust and user-friendly experience when working with lists.

olddocs/About.md, after:

A few new possible versions of About.md (older is down to the end)

Smartpad is a lightweight computational notebook designed for thinking with numbers, not just calculating them. It blends calculator-style expressions, unit-aware math, variables, percentages, dates, lists, and light symbolic reasoning into a single plain-text surface. The core idea is that you write things the way you’d naturally think about them (including units, currencies, and phrases), and Smartpad continuously interprets them as meaningful computations. It’s closer to a “quantitative scratchpad” than a programming language or a spreadsheet.

Smartpad emphasizes readability and intent over strict syntax. Units are first-class, conversions are semantic (to, in, on, off, as %), variables can be named with spaces, and results can be previewed live or explicitly committed. The goal is to make everyday quantitative reasoning—finance, planning, science, estimation—fast, expressive, and low-friction.

# Killer demo notebook (markdown)

Goal: show, in ~10 minutes, why this is not a fancy calculator, but a thinking pad that makes real-life reasoning faster than Excel, phone calc, or Wolfram.

0) Warm-up: “natural” math that stays readable
PI * 2 =>6.2832
sqrt(16) + 2.5 =>6.5
max(3, 7) * 2 =>14

1) Personal finance: budget, scenarios, and “what changed?”

Track a monthly budget, then change one knob and see everything update.

rent = $1250
utilities = $185
internet = $75
subscriptions = $49.99
monthly total = rent + utilities + internet + subscriptions =>$1559.99
yearly total = monthly total * 12 =>$18719.88


What if rent increases 6% next renewal?

next rent = 6% on rent =>$1325
next monthly = next rent + utilities + internet + subscriptions =>$1634.99
delta = next monthly - monthly total =>$75
delta as % of monthly total =>4.8074%

2) Split a bill, but with real human inputs
people = 6
pizza = $18.99
drinks = $9.50
tip = 10%
subtotal = pizza + drinks =>$28.49
total = tip on subtotal =>$31.339
each = total / people =>$5.2232


Round per person, then reconcile rounding remainder

each rounded = round(each, 2) =>$5.22
paid total = each rounded * people =>$31.32
remainder = total - paid total =>$0.019

3) Units + reasoning: make “dimension mistakes” hard to miss
trip distance = 12.5 km
trip time = 25 min
speed = trip distance / trip time =>8.3333 m/s
speed to km/h =>30 km/h


Energy example (derived units + conversion)

mass = 2 kg
accel = 3 m/s^2
force = mass * accel =>6 N
distance = 4 m
energy = force * distance =>24 J
energy to kWh =>6.6667e-6 kWh

4) Lists: real-world “many numbers” reasoning in one line

(This foreshadows the list spec you asked for.)

expenses = $1250, $185, $75, $49.99
sum(expenses) =>$1559.99
distribution = expenses / sum(expenses) as % =>80.1295%, 11.8597%, 4.8080%, 3.2028%


Turn “many speeds” into a min/mean/max summary

speeds = 8.2 m/s, 8.4 m/s, 8.1 m/s, 8.6 m/s
min(speeds) =>8.1 m/s
mean(speeds) =>8.325 m/s
max(speeds) =>8.6 m/s

5) Solver: “I know relationships, not the unknown”

Classic “I know the formula, I want the missing variable.”

solve qty:
  total = $90
  price = $3
  total = price * qty
=>qty = 30


Units-aware solve

solve time:
  distance = 120 km
  speed = 80 km/h
  distance = speed * time
=>time = 1.5 h

6) Time: deadlines and planning without spreadsheets
today =>2026-01-07
deadline = today + 3 weeks =>2026-01-28


Work time

start = 09:15
end = 17:45
worked = end - start =>8.5 h

7) Uncertainty: the “thinking aid” superpower
length = 10 ± 0.2 cm =>[9.8, 10.2] cm
area = length^2 =>[96.04, 104.04] cm^2


A decision example: can it fit?

door = 80 ± 1 cm =>[79, 81] cm
box = 80 ± 0.2 cm =>[79.8, 80.2] cm
clearance = door - box =>[-1.2, 1.2] cm


Interpretation: might fit, might not. That’s honest reasoning.

8) Explanation mode: trust-building
explain energy


Expected output (example):

energy = force × distance
force = mass × accel = 2 kg × 3 m/s^2 = 6 N
distance = 4 m
energy = 6 N × 4 m = 24 J


If you implement plotting later, this notebook becomes even more killer by adding:

histogram of speeds

pie chart of distribution

time-series “budget by month”

uncertainty intervals as bands










============================





# SmartPad Overview

SmartPad is a text‑first computation pad. You type plain lines, define variables, write expressions, and append the trigger `=>` to see inline results as lightweight widgets next to your text. Your text never changes; results are decorations.

## Key capabilities
- Inline results for any line ending in `=>`
- Variables with immediate reuse across lines
- Units and dimensional analysis with conversions
- Clear inline errors next to the exact trigger
- Variable panel displaying current values
- Templates and example snippets
- Number scrubbing and semantic highlighting
- Save and load functionality for content persistence

## Quick examples
```text
2 + 3 => 5

length = 10 m
time = 20 s
speed = length / time => 0.5 m/s
speed to km/h => 1.8 km/h

width = 14 m
area = length * width => 140 m^2
area => 140 m^2

mass = 3 kg
accel = 9.8 m/s^2
force = mass * accel => 29.4 N
force to lbf => 6.61 lbf
```

Notes
- Results may differ slightly due to rounding and smart display thresholds.
- Widgets appear only when the line ends with `=>` (or a combined assignment with `=>`).

## Where to go next
- Learn all user‑facing features and exact behavior → [Spec.md](./Spec.md)
- See how it works under the hood → [Architecture.md](./Architecture.md)
