website/docs/specs/file-management.md, before:

---
title: "File Management"
description: "Defines sheet storage, autosave, import/export behavior, trash lifecycle, and multi-tab synchronization."
---

import ExamplePlayground from "@site/src/components/ExamplePlayground";

<div className="spotlight-panel">
<h3>File Management</h3>
<p><strong>What this unlocks:</strong> Defines sheet storage, autosave, import/export behavior, trash lifecycle, and multi-tab synchronization.</p>
<p><strong>Why teams care:</strong> Protect user trust with durable persistence and predictable recovery behavior.</p>
<p><strong>Source spec:</strong> <a href="https://github.com/nmaxcom/SmartPad/blob/main/docs/Specs/FileManagement.spec.md">docs/Specs/FileManagement.spec.md</a></p>
</div>

## What you can ship with this

Use this guide to move from isolated formulas to production-grade file management behavior in real SmartPad sheets.

## Live playground

Examples for this feature are being backfilled. Add examples to the source spec and regenerate docs.

## Design notes

- Keep formulas legible by splitting intent into named lines before collapsing math.
- Prefer explicit conversions and target units instead of inferring context from nearby lines.
- Validate expected output with at least one positive and one guardrail-oriented example.

## Common pitfalls

- Build from small named steps first, then collapse into concise formulas.

## Capability map

- 1. Objective
- 2. Technical Architecture
- 3. User Experience & UI Flow
- 4. Functional Requirements

## Deep reference

- Canonical behavior contract: [FileManagement.spec.md](https://github.com/nmaxcom/SmartPad/blob/main/docs/Specs/FileManagement.spec.md)
- Regenerate docs after spec edits: `npm run docs:docusaurus:generate`

Commit message:

docs: unify full visual language and restructure guide flow

website/docs/specs/file-management.md, after:

---
title: "File Management"
description: "Ensure durable sheets with autosave, import/export, trash, and tab sync behavior."
---

import ExamplePlayground from "@site/src/components/ExamplePlayground";

<div className="doc-hero">
<p className="doc-hero__kicker">Workspace</p>
<h2>File Management</h2>
<p>Ensure durable sheets with autosave, import/export, trash, and tab sync behavior.</p>
</div>

## Why this matters

Data durability is part of product trust, not a secondary concern.

## Use it when

- You need confidence that work is saved and recoverable.
- You collaborate across tabs or import/export workflows.
- You want predictable behavior for trash and restoration.

## Try it in SmartPad

Examples for this feature are being backfilled. Add examples in the source spec and regenerate docs.

## What this feature guarantees

- Objective
- Technical Architecture
- User Experience & UI Flow
- Functional Requirements

## Common mistakes

- Build complex formulas from named intermediate lines for reliability.

<p className="doc-footnote">Authoritative spec: <a href="https://github.com/nmaxcom/SmartPad/blob/main/docs/Specs/FileManagement.spec.md">docs/Specs/FileManagement.spec.md</a></p>
