docs/Specs/Plotting.spec.md, before:

Alright. Below is a **complete, self-contained specification** for the feature, written as if it were the **only document an engineer/designer will ever see**.
It includes philosophy, UX, syntax, states, rules, edge cases, and implementation notes.
No open questions, no “ask later”. This is *the* source of truth.

---

# Smartpad — Interactive Dependency Views (Plotting & Exploration)

## 0. Purpose

This feature enables **direct, playful exploration of quantitative relationships** inside Smartpad documents.

It allows users to:

* Visually explore how a computed result depends on its inputs
* Scrub existing variables and see immediate visual feedback
* Persist exploratory visualizations as **detached views** in the document
* Recover gracefully from document edits, errors, and re-wiring

This is **not a charting feature**.
It is a **relationship inspection system** designed to preserve Smartpad’s core philosophy:

> *Write how you think. Explore without friction. Commit insight only when useful.*

---

## 1. Core Philosophy & Non-Negotiables

### 1.1 Results are first-class, even if unnamed

Any computed result (including inline results after `=>`) is a valid exploration target.

```smartpad
a + b => 20%
```

This result is:

* clickable
* explorable
* attachable to a persistent view

There is **no requirement** to assign results to variables.

---

### 1.2 Everything after `=>` is flowy and brittle — and that’s OK

Smartpad embraces impermanence.

Plots and views:

* must tolerate breakage
* must never silently disappear
* must offer explicit recovery paths

Brittleness is not a bug — **losing user intent is**.

---

### 1.3 Text is the source of truth

* Variables are scrubbed in text (already existing behavior)
* Plots never become the primary control surface
* Plots are *views*, not controllers

---

## 2. Mental Model

### 2.1 What the user is doing

The user is not “plotting a function”.

They are answering:

> “How does **this result** depend on **that value**?”

This is called **dependency exploration**.

---

### 2.2 What a View Is

A **View** is:

* a declarative, persistent visualization
* bound to a computed expression node
* showing the relationship between that expression and one independent variable

A View:

* survives edits
* can disconnect
* can be reconnected
* is serialized in text

---

## 3. High-Level UX Flow

### 3.1 Entry point — clicking a result

Clickable targets:

* any derived variable
* any inline result after `=>`

Hover affordance:

* subtle underline or glow
* tooltip: **“Explore dependencies”**

---

### 3.2 Selection Mode (relationship picking)

Clicking a result enters **Selection Mode**:

* All valid candidates highlight:

  * numeric variables
  * dates
  * percentages
  * compatible results

User flow:

1. Click **result** (Y)
2. Click **independent variable** (X)
3. Plot appears immediately

No menus. No config dialogs.

---

### 3.3 Transient exploration plot

When X is selected:

* A plot appears inline, below the expression
* X = selected variable
* Y = selected result
* Domain inferred automatically
* A dot marks the current value

This plot is **temporary** unless explicitly persisted.

---

### 3.4 Scrubbing (already existing behavior)

All variables are already scrubbable by dragging their unit/value.

During scrubbing:

* plot updates live
* dot moves
* dependent results update

Plots never introduce new scrubbing mechanics.

---

## 4. Persistent Views (Detached Views)

### 4.1 Why detached views exist

Exploration often yields insight worth keeping.

Detached Views:

* persist independently of exploration state
* survive document edits
* are explicit, textual artifacts

---

### 4.2 View syntax

A persistent View is declared by an @view **annotation line** immediately following an expression:

```smartpad
estimated value = principal * (1 + annual return)^years => $29,507.27
@view plot x=years
```

This syntax:

* binds to the computed node of the line above
* does **not** use `=>`
* produces no scalar result
* renders a plot block below it

---

## 5. Mini-Grammar for `@view`

### 5.1 General form

```
@view <kind> <params>
```

Where:

* `@view` is a reserved directive
* `<kind>` defaults to `plot` if omitted
* `<params>` are key=value pairs (space-separated)

---

### 5.2 Supported fields (v1)

| Field     | Required | Description                              |
| --------- | -------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `kind`    | no       | `plot`, `scatter`, `hist`, `box`, `auto` |
| `x`       | no       | Independent variable (symbol name)       |
| `domain`  | no       | Semantic domain of X                     |
| `view`    | no       | X viewport (pan/zoom state)              |
| `ydomain` | no       | Semantic domain of Y                     |
| `yview`   | no       | Y viewport (pan/zoom state)              |
| `size`    | no       | `sm`, `md`, `lg`, `xl`                   |

---

### 5.3 Examples

Basic:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years
```

Multiple series (comma-separated):

```smartpad
f = 2*x + 1
g = x^2
@view plot x=x y=f,g
```

Multiple series with spaces (quote the value or rely on space-tolerant parsing):

```smartpad
f = 2*x + 1
g = x^2
@view plot x=x y=f, g
@view plot x=x y="2*x + 1, x^2"
```

With explicit domain:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years domain=0..40
```

Frozen auto domain:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years domain=@auto(frozen)
```

With viewport:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years domain=0..40 view=5..25
```

With explicit Y domain:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years ydomain=0..100000
```

With explicit Y viewport:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years yview=1000..8000
```

Size:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years size=lg
```

Unnamed result:

```smartpad
a + b => 20%
@view plot x=a
```

---

## 6. Binding Rules

### 6.1 How a view binds

Internally, a view binds to:

* the **expression node ID** of the previous line
* not the textual line index

This ensures:

* moving lines does not break views
* edits preserve intent when possible

---

### 6.2 If the previous line changes

* If expression still exists → view updates
* If expression changes identity → view enters **Disconnected state**

---

## 7. View Lifecycle States

### 7.1 Connected

* Expression exists
* Variable exists
* Plot renders normally

---

### 7.2 Disconnected

Triggers:

* expression deleted
* expression errors
* variable missing or incompatible

UI:

* Plot area remains
* Curve hidden or faded
* Header shows:

  > ⚠ Disconnected — expression unavailable

Actions:

* Reconnect
* Change expression
* Change variable

---

### 7.3 Reconnection Mode

When user clicks a disconnected view:

* All valid expressions/results highlight
* User clicks new Y
* Then selects X

View reconnects and resumes live updates.

---

## 8. Domain Inference Rules

### 8.1 Explicit domain always wins

If `domain=` is specified, it is used verbatim.

---

### 8.2 Auto domain inference (deterministic)

Auto domains must be:

* predictable
* stable across reloads
* unit-aware

Rules:

* Numeric: centered around current value, symmetric, clamped
* Time (years, months): floor at 0 unless negative meaningful
* Percentages: clamped to sensible bounds (never cross invalid zones silently)
* Dates: calendar-aware window around current date

---

### 8.3 Invalid regions

* Curves break (no vertical jumps)
* Invalid areas are not interpolated
* Warnings are shown when necessary

---

## 9. Pan & Zoom

### 9.1 Conceptual separation

* **Domain** = semantic range of X
* **Viewport** = what the user is looking at

Pan/zoom only affects the **viewport**.

---

### 9.2 Interaction

* Scroll = zoom X
* Shift + scroll = pan
* Small “Reset view” control restores viewport to computed view (instead of the full domain)

---

### 9.3 Persistence rules

* Pan/zoom is transient unless user commits it
* If user commits:

  * viewport is serialized as `view=`
* Domain never silently changes

---

### 9.4 Freeze / Commit actions

Available in plot header:

* “Freeze domain”
* “Set domain from view”
* “Reset to auto”

These convert emergent state into declared text.

---

## 10. Chart Size

### 10.1 Sizes

Supported:

* `sm`
* `md` (default)
* `lg`
* `xl`

---

### 10.2 Resizing interaction

* Hover plot → subtle resize grip
* Drag vertically
* Snaps to nearest size

Size stored as:

```smartpad
size=md
```

---

## 11. Multiple Series & Lists

### 11.1 Lists

If X or Y is a list:

* `plot` → line or bar (auto)
* `hist` → histogram
* `box` → box plot

---

### 11.2 Multi-series (future-safe)

Multiple expressions may be supported later via block syntax, but **not required for v1**.

---


## 12. Performance & Reactivity

* Views update on any dependency change
* During scrubbing:

  * sampling density reduced
* After idle:

  * full fidelity recompute

Adaptive sampling is mandatory.

---

## 13. Non-Goals (Explicit)

This feature does **not**:

* introduce chart builders
* introduce sliders
* introduce dashboards
* replace numeric results
* hide ambiguity or invalid math

---

## 14. Success Criteria

This feature is successful if:

* users explore without planning
* insight appears faster than calculation
* plots feel like *extensions of thought*
* nothing breaks silently
* documents remain readable as plain text

---

## FAQ
### Possible Confusion: clicking vs @view syntax — do they both “declare a view”?
They serve different purposes:
Clicking creates a transient exploration view (think “inspection mode”).
@view creates a persistent document view (a saved lens).

Clicking does not declare a persistent view by default—because Smartpad shouldn’t litter the document just because you looked at something.
The missing link: “Pin/Detach” action
Clicking produces a transient plot; then the user can choose Detach View to insert the @view line.

So:
click result → transient plot appears
user likes it → click “Detach view”
Smartpad inserts @view ... line under the target expression
now it’s persistent
That keeps the notebook clean and still lets people “commit insight”.

## 15. Summary

**Interactive Dependency Views** turn Smartpad from a calculator into a *thinking surface*.

They:

* respect impermanence
* preserve intent
* keep text authoritative
* make exploration playful and fast
* allow insight to be captured declaratively

This spec is complete and sufficient for implementation.

---

If you want, next step (optional) would be:

* a reference implementation outline (data structures + AST hooks)
* or a designer-facing visual state diagram

But as requested: **this document stands on its own.**

Commit message:

Enhance plotting features by adding glow effects to graphs and improving axis label formatting. This update introduces a new glow effect for visual clarity in graphs, updates the CSS for better styling, and refines axis label handling to include unit labels. Additionally, documentation has been updated to reflect these enhancements.

docs/Specs/Plotting.spec.md, after:

Alright. Below is a **complete, self-contained specification** for the feature, written as if it were the **only document an engineer/designer will ever see**.
It includes philosophy, UX, syntax, states, rules, edge cases, and implementation notes.
No open questions, no “ask later”. This is *the* source of truth.

---

# Smartpad — Interactive Dependency Views (Plotting & Exploration)

## 0. Purpose

This feature enables **direct, playful exploration of quantitative relationships** inside Smartpad documents.

It allows users to:

* Visually explore how a computed result depends on its inputs
* Scrub existing variables and see immediate visual feedback
* Persist exploratory visualizations as **detached views** in the document
* Recover gracefully from document edits, errors, and re-wiring

This is **not a charting feature**.
It is a **relationship inspection system** designed to preserve Smartpad’s core philosophy:

> *Write how you think. Explore without friction. Commit insight only when useful.*

---

## 1. Core Philosophy & Non-Negotiables

### 1.1 Results are first-class, even if unnamed

Any computed result (including inline results after `=>`) is a valid exploration target.

```smartpad
a + b => 20%
```

This result is:

* clickable
* explorable
* attachable to a persistent view

There is **no requirement** to assign results to variables.

---

### 1.2 Everything after `=>` is flowy and brittle — and that’s OK

Smartpad embraces impermanence.

Plots and views:

* must tolerate breakage
* must never silently disappear
* must offer explicit recovery paths

Brittleness is not a bug — **losing user intent is**.

---

### 1.3 Text is the source of truth

* Variables are scrubbed in text (already existing behavior)
* Plots never become the primary control surface
* Plots are *views*, not controllers

---

## 2. Mental Model

### 2.1 What the user is doing

The user is not “plotting a function”.

They are answering:

> “How does **this result** depend on **that value**?”

This is called **dependency exploration**.

---

### 2.2 What a View Is

A **View** is:

* a declarative, persistent visualization
* bound to a computed expression node
* showing the relationship between that expression and one independent variable

A View:

* survives edits
* can disconnect
* can be reconnected
* is serialized in text

---

## 3. High-Level UX Flow

### 3.1 Entry point — clicking a result

Clickable targets:

* any derived variable
* any inline result after `=>`

Hover affordance:

* subtle underline or glow
* tooltip: **“Explore dependencies”**

---

### 3.2 Selection Mode (relationship picking)

Clicking a result enters **Selection Mode**:

* All valid candidates highlight:

  * numeric variables
  * dates
  * percentages
  * compatible results

User flow:

1. Click **result** (Y)
2. Click **independent variable** (X)
3. Plot appears immediately

No menus. No config dialogs.

---

### 3.3 Transient exploration plot

When X is selected:

* A plot appears inline, below the expression
* X = selected variable
* Y = selected result
* Domain inferred automatically
* A dot marks the current value

This plot is **temporary** unless explicitly persisted.

---

### 3.4 Scrubbing (already existing behavior)

All variables are already scrubbable by dragging their unit/value.

During scrubbing:

* plot updates live
* dot moves
* dependent results update

Plots never introduce new scrubbing mechanics.

---

## 4. Persistent Views (Detached Views)

### 4.1 Why detached views exist

Exploration often yields insight worth keeping.

Detached Views:

* persist independently of exploration state
* survive document edits
* are explicit, textual artifacts

---

### 4.2 View syntax

A persistent View is declared by an @view **annotation line** immediately following an expression:

```smartpad
estimated value = principal * (1 + annual return)^years => $29,507.27
@view plot x=years
```

This syntax:

* binds to the computed node of the line above
* does **not** use `=>`
* produces no scalar result
* renders a plot block below it

---

## 5. Mini-Grammar for `@view`

### 5.1 General form

```
@view <kind> <params>
```

Where:

* `@view` is a reserved directive
* `<kind>` defaults to `plot` if omitted
* `<params>` are key=value pairs (space-separated)

---

### 5.2 Supported fields (v1)

| Field     | Required | Description                              |
| --------- | -------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `kind`    | no       | `plot`, `scatter`, `hist`, `box`, `auto` |
| `x`       | no       | Independent variable (symbol name)       |
| `domain`  | no       | Semantic domain of X                     |
| `view`    | no       | X viewport (pan/zoom state)              |
| `ydomain` | no       | Semantic domain of Y                     |
| `yview`   | no       | Y viewport (pan/zoom state)              |
| `size`    | no       | `sm`, `md`, `lg`, `xl`                   |

---

### 5.3 Examples

Basic:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years
```

Multiple series (comma-separated):

```smartpad
f = 2*x + 1
g = x^2
@view plot x=x y=f,g
```

Multiple series with spaces (quote the value or rely on space-tolerant parsing):

```smartpad
f = 2*x + 1
g = x^2
@view plot x=x y=f, g
@view plot x=x y="2*x + 1, x^2"
```

With explicit domain:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years domain=0..40
```

Frozen auto domain:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years domain=@auto(frozen)
```

With viewport:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years domain=0..40 view=5..25
```

`view=` only affects the X axis. Use `yview=` for Y.

With explicit Y domain:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years ydomain=0..100000
```

With explicit Y viewport:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years yview=1000..8000
```

Size:

```smartpad
@view plot x=years size=lg
```

Unnamed result:

```smartpad
a + b => 20%
@view plot x=a
```

---

## 6. Binding Rules

### 6.1 How a view binds

Internally, a view binds to:

* the **expression node ID** of the previous line
* not the textual line index

This ensures:

* moving lines does not break views
* edits preserve intent when possible

---

### 6.2 If the previous line changes

* If expression still exists → view updates
* If expression changes identity → view enters **Disconnected state**

---

## 7. View Lifecycle States

### 7.1 Connected

* Expression exists
* Variable exists
* Plot renders normally

---

### 7.2 Disconnected

Triggers:

* expression deleted
* expression errors
* variable missing or incompatible

UI:

* Plot area remains
* Curve hidden or faded
* Header shows:

  > ⚠ Disconnected — expression unavailable

Actions:

* Reconnect
* Change expression
* Change variable

---

### 7.3 Reconnection Mode

When user clicks a disconnected view:

* All valid expressions/results highlight
* User clicks new Y
* Then selects X

View reconnects and resumes live updates.

---

## 8. Domain Inference Rules

### 8.1 Explicit domain always wins

If `domain=` is specified, it is used verbatim.

---

### 8.2 Auto domain inference (deterministic)

Auto domains must be:

* predictable
* stable across reloads
* unit-aware

Rules:

* Numeric: centered around current value, symmetric, clamped
* Time (years, months): floor at 0 unless negative meaningful
* Percentages: clamped to sensible bounds (never cross invalid zones silently)
* Dates: calendar-aware window around current date

---

### 8.3 Invalid regions

* Curves break (no vertical jumps)
* Invalid areas are not interpolated
* Warnings are shown when necessary

---

## 9. Pan & Zoom

### 9.1 Conceptual separation

* **Domain** = semantic range of X
* **Viewport** = what the user is looking at

Pan/zoom only affects the **viewport**.

---

### 9.2 Interaction

* Scroll = zoom X
* Shift + scroll = pan
* Small “Reset view” control restores viewport to computed view (instead of the full domain)

---

### 9.3 Persistence rules

* Pan/zoom is transient unless user commits it
* If user commits:

  * viewport is serialized as `view=`
* Domain never silently changes

---

### 9.4 Freeze / Commit actions

Available in plot header:

* “Freeze domain”
* “Set domain from view”
* “Reset to auto”

These convert emergent state into declared text.

---

## 10. Chart Size

### 10.1 Sizes

Supported:

* `sm`
* `md` (default)
* `lg`
* `xl`

---

### 10.2 Resizing interaction

* Hover plot → subtle resize grip
* Drag vertically
* Snaps to nearest size

Size stored as:

```smartpad
size=md
```

---

## 11. Multiple Series & Lists

### 11.1 Lists

If X or Y is a list:

* `plot` → line or bar (auto)
* `hist` → histogram
* `box` → box plot

---

### 11.2 Multi-series (future-safe)

Multiple expressions may be supported later via block syntax, but **not required for v1**.

---


## 12. Performance & Reactivity

* Views update on any dependency change
* During scrubbing:

  * sampling density reduced
* After idle:

  * full fidelity recompute

Adaptive sampling is mandatory.

---

## 13. Non-Goals (Explicit)

This feature does **not**:

* introduce chart builders
* introduce sliders
* introduce dashboards
* replace numeric results
* hide ambiguity or invalid math

---

## 14. Success Criteria

This feature is successful if:

* users explore without planning
* insight appears faster than calculation
* plots feel like *extensions of thought*
* nothing breaks silently
* documents remain readable as plain text

---

## FAQ
### Possible Confusion: clicking vs @view syntax — do they both “declare a view”?
They serve different purposes:
Clicking creates a transient exploration view (think “inspection mode”).
@view creates a persistent document view (a saved lens).

Clicking does not declare a persistent view by default—because Smartpad shouldn’t litter the document just because you looked at something.
The missing link: “Pin/Detach” action
Clicking produces a transient plot; then the user can choose Detach View to insert the @view line.

So:
click result → transient plot appears
user likes it → click “Detach view”
Smartpad inserts @view ... line under the target expression
now it’s persistent
That keeps the notebook clean and still lets people “commit insight”.

## 15. Summary

**Interactive Dependency Views** turn Smartpad from a calculator into a *thinking surface*.

They:

* respect impermanence
* preserve intent
* keep text authoritative
* make exploration playful and fast
* allow insight to be captured declaratively

This spec is complete and sufficient for implementation.

---

If you want, next step (optional) would be:

* a reference implementation outline (data structures + AST hooks)
* or a designer-facing visual state diagram

But as requested: **this document stands on its own.**
